R-0.0.1 (#89)
bob-crutchley/notes: topics/networking/modules/udp/README.md

# UDP
<!--TOC_START-->
### Contents
- [Overview](#overview)
- [UDP Header Format](#udp-header-format)
- [UDP Operation](#udp-operation)
- [Tasks](#tasks)
	- [Viewing UDP Packets with Wireshark](#viewing-udp-packets-with-wireshark)

<!--TOC_END-->
## Overview

> User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is connectionless and not a reliable service compared to TCP, there isn’t acknowledgement of packet delivery, sequencing or even error recovery.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is connectionless and not as reliablem a service as TCP. There is no acknowledgement of packet delivery, sequencing or even error recovery.
```

Author: ```suggestion
User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is connectionless and not as reliable a service as TCP. There is no acknowledgement of packet delivery, sequencing or even error recovery.
```

> UDP however does have a very important advantage over TCP which is speed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, UDP does have a very important advantage over TCP - **speed**.
```

> Higher connection speeds are always preferred however sacrificing reliability can be a big issue depending on the use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Higher connection speeds are always preferred, but sacrificing reliability can be a big issue (depending on the use case).
```

> UDP is great for tasks which require data on demand or in real-time such audio and video streaming in conference calls or when playing online multiplayer games.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
UDP is great for tasks that require data on demand or in real-time, such as audio and video streaming on conference calls or when playing online multiplayer games.
```

## UDP Header Format

> Other than the data, there are four components to a UDP packet’s header, this is significantly smaller than the TCP headers because UDP is more limited in capability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other than the data, there are four components to a UDP packet’s header. This is significantly smaller than the TCP headers, because UDP is more limited in capability.
```

1. `Source Port` - The port from which the packet was sent from
2. `Destination Port` - The port of the receiving device

> 3. `Length` - The total size of each data is stored here including bother the header and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. `Length` - The total size of each data packet is stored here, including both the header and the
```

data.
4. `Checksum` – Similar to how TCP works, UDP checksum allows the receivers to validate
the incoming data for any corrupted parts of the message. 

![UDP Header](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/g8GbrocvKB53cwpqiWtSqxgnmkdiUJMQOLsfd4gxkTf2Qq82nASrHXe2oTtMa_MVmzuuH33K0F8T7cNDunhBHnGKQQhmir5LyacyCWpPEQA63kZrPMSpYYKc4Ch_g_oMbpAqzXxv6iivDz7L0S64gP7cHyGCVndcpHtHie4hjGYhePBTtVr9SJ14w7eRB8tirtFFbOBRMuocYiUB-42wnNP3rOq6nUnqGwolgM5Sf9-P0YQfX7HipbyOcDcXTX42TKnvHrdnpHVndv6YIByhNKpRM-opAKrTbrbtfl6sEzlg5Ip-rZB-8QCf755dn-L2g1tYmvKoJHic_fs6ZOSj2K0Il3ybk5k-b5DhsfrQ1EOD3XJv8kCL-E4i1IriAIchgB_ZMM5EFBizbcE1FyZ4RLRnHJtVzLf7vuBzr9RMGi9W22vsm6ad_6K1-P1Z3WokXc4-a2nPyHvf_Fis9vldJ9WsdJeiKc-OBS2D7yk-rdQuwp_XRm_2uRae1_HET7RRcHjq9N45EOtA87OPJGVvXbPQkuLwtJCE4Alm3Fyec4zNzfDoVS4XVGwi1b9UkS33exSPOmTWnXhBB0kzwLJDSj83g6wRWuoE4LtmCXxbhBx-srU3XFCGdVRfTaJ7BU4aar20lkjIgqNgCfS-7c2nKS7pUBEixcdIfbIb8e8lUE08XS3vmDtT89tmfp5-dPNsEwqpYh73yFRNieu33IiXQifD50QDXX5uRVoWyrtZMMK1XYAE=w1084-h341-no)

## UDP Operation
Regarding the illustration below:

- Segment 1, 2, 4 and 6 are successfully received by the server and processed

> - Segment 3, was lost in a connection interruption, there is no way of the remote server or local machine knowing that it should have received that lost packet. If this were TCP, this packet would have been resent to the server after a time-out period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Segment 3 was lost in a connection interruption. There is no way of the remote server, or local machine, knowing that it should have received that lost packet. If this were TCP, the packet would have been resent to the server after a time-out period.
```

> - The packet from segment 5 has been corrupted and the checksum validation fails when it reaches the server, the local machine does not know about this and will not resend the packet. The server will simply discard this packet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The packet from segment 5 has been corrupted and the checksum validation fails when it reaches the server. The local machine does not know about this and will not resend the packet; it will simply discard it.
```

![UDP Operation](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/kskI1eWHh67F2Nbh1raZeNNllsbIPdl9bh6bqC9_XKkRx3VHkE34ToBYZNsEjtlrfRog7vXYhrrJ5JEkDdfgEbgvp4V95F7f1PbbO3rxAiF8SC-d0zfv27lu5WJ-KGk-wQrDdXPiv9paqM5pnvONDSfOlwfmWSOzEdLJRx4vsG9oyQ6kxu3tEbhEy4ktU4DtGfhvohTSMx5hpVab4tP618_eacN8ji-8PpD3A6BIXIfZruxAus8prZyak0aTeChW2KeLoVL35PzH3_NRiH0d23ZrOaT-eZF7yD5Rf8pqyP4C4UAJRLP_HTu-a8z13NRSOaMezE7bB42GMImQA2GOnrjOvXaNhJEzAMuouVTg98NxFLJc4-0o-RkHjf1yqpDjVFahC6-lx7jxYhu_OTXsE5MnQQs7t8NVwOmCzEgRkvKAViRH4xNUgCe_IKO_L5Ys8CGEmiqZ7d9sUE81zRcE_tnHaK5sNneVxaIiXZLIp6KFeRkcCOQ4qZ1CkXGgXj70L-ZF6O79m22mjQmwvaewNu62LTNJRiNoDjQUou3Kf-wMK95vtQZd9Sm19x66RdZA32QonJPU_49rFaZccn4OaK3qcE5Q8vCek4-OlBglnokzcwL3keTP9qi1NYZpT1X9Z8nwmrsrG6k4uOQ9GKDZ1yx3oUwbvGyp18GbqddhXgFkHnUuJBD0Fd7gEnI4XgteKOuLIMvT-TyeEjHzNX3zP-ppwED-tkTR1Xxw8s46dXw3Fkt4=w725-h685-no)

## Tasks
For the task below you will need Wireshark installed.

> If you are unsure what Wireshark is, how to use or install it please have a look at the Wireshark [Introduction Module](/topics/wireshark/modules/introduction)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are unsure what Wireshark is, or how to use or install it, please have a look at the Wireshark [Introduction Module](/topics/wireshark/modules/introduction)
```

### Viewing UDP Packets with Wireshark

> - We can start by running a scan for a moment until some packets come in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We can start by running a brief scan, until some packets come in.
```

> - Add a display filter for UDP by putting `udp` in the display filter box:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add a display filter for UDP, by putting `udp` in the display filter box:
```

    ![UDP Display Filter](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/uz5gxaGCQE_guHbfHo9MVM7onIM1qEmtdxzkHTFGRd8hWZHV_PS7KZtnJPcrrNnfJV8oTw2VWiIJ-EHAUfm7UmOPs4xMLseSpqFMCvJ1ELKmw2A4E2xhGnI7D7L0GxxVwFMSYveEqfI3V2NVO268dK6eLRMrGYXbiULBuPhSlCdamh4nefkOITf30Ih2272G-IiT0X5uYXVT9GgOpbHadJwsIDs8FWujTH8iAf5UvgjvH84Rg9OVXPrJB2N8Oc_Ljuy3br5GuGUMKHn8m9jaT9bIKTHihYp3WO4mSpwn-kymrA6rplz9DlKEbu7awkZk6xIH6yTqTStMO4H82Q8yPX5W1NA9nf0IBdeLG-qqCspeVKeM_oW_hfuI8Rf6Y6_WKigAOQ5McmIsQP5pZNeOK-YkkNePLSnTeb8ZbJXiHeJPIlcYhts88X3DkRLNQtVPoHGmAXfHUHVBjwVetBX-tgziDoib6IxCN7tSzHq-uK1bE1ubhxuzXbkLGn1JMtOk2hsYP5ncTAnIOTjg51XVCOE3i27MEtakh5UCFU-6-5wUol6rjnoL_UIVS1tg5S_m8WuTFbPMMzyrvn5xzMmVtgOz8A1gqK_lr5KDHlu9vVh09DFaS93PKER8DWZcUYhYM8nHT0NPW1Zr-Bd0MeqxshAK3pCCdn1aY91I0IsSrH-xhlvswZaiV9mHVv8BcvSXExYH0k_2Kv_6q-zkPQ5JoRvZX56jCWleZB4wpw4qqMVwflK2=w1116-h51-no)

> - Once there are some packets there you can stop the scan and click on one of the packets which use the UDP protocol

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Once there are some packets there, you can stop the scan and click on one of the packets that use the UDP protocol
```

- On the middle window frame, select the `User Datagram Protocol` drop down

> You should now be able to see information about the UDP packet; see how many of the properties shown in UDP Header diagram you can find here:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should now be able to see information about the UDP packet. See how many of the properties shown in UDP Header diagram you can find here:
```
